Dear Editor,

We wish to submit an original research article entitled
“Identification of low energy nuclear recoils in a gas TPC with
optical readout” for consideration by Measurement Science and
Technology.  We confirm that this work is original and has not been
published elsewhere, nor is it currently under consideration for
publication elsewhere.  In this paper, we report on the development of
a novel experimental technique to detect signals from low-energy (keV
energy range) nuclear recoils in a gaseous Time Projection Chamber
with a GEM amplification stage optically read out by a low-noise
scientific CMOS camera. This is significant in the search for a
technique to detect light Dark Matter particles, because we
demonstrate the ability to identify nuclear recoils down to 6 keV,
with 99% electron background rejection at the same energy, making this
a very promising candidate for future investigations of ultra-rare
events as directional direct Dark Matter searches.

We believe that this manuscript is appropriate for publication by
"Measurement Science and Technology" because it contains a description
of the experimental technique and of the algorithm for the image
reconstruction, based on a multi-stage pattern recognition which
utilizes an advanced clustering technique. This includes the
application of existing clustering techniques to this novel
experimental setup, the development of a full event reconstruction of
the interactions in the gas volume, through the optical readout of the
detector. Finally, a statistical analysis to measure the efficiency of
detecting nuclear recoils and the rejection of different kinds of
backgrounds is also performed showing promising result in the panorama
of light Dark Matter candidates search.

