The interaction of different particles with the nuclei or the
electrons in the gas of the TPC produce different patterns of the 2D
projection of the initial 3D particle trajectory.  These
characteristics, to which we refer generically as ``cluster shapes'',
are useful to discriminate different sources. In particular, they are
used in this paper to select a pure sample of nuclear recoil
candidates produced by the interaction of the neutrons originating in
the \ambe source and different sources of backgrounds. The main ones
are described in the following:

\begin{itemize}
  \item \textit{projected length and width:~} a singular value
    decomposition (SVD) on the $x \times y$ matrix of the pixels
    belonging to the supercluster is performed. The eigenvectors found
    can be interpreted as the directions of the two axes of an ellipse
    in 2D. The eigenvalues represents the magnitude of its semiaxes:
    the major one is defined as \textit{length}, $l$ the minor one
    as \textit{width}, $w$. These are well defined for elliptic
    clusters, or long and straight tracks. The directions along the
    major and minor axis are defined as \textit{longitudinal}
    and \textit{transverse} in the following. The longitudinal and
    transverse supercluster profiles, for the cosmic ray track
    candidated shown as an example in Fig.~\ref{fig:super_clusters2}
    (bottom) are shown in Fig.~\ref{fig:profiles}. The longitudinal
    profile shows the typical pattern of energy depositions in
    clusters, while the transverse profile, dominated by the diffusion
    in the gas, shows a Gaussian shape. It has to be noted that the
    cluster sizes represent only the projection of the 3D track in the
    TPC on the 2D $x$--$y$ plane;

    \begin{figure}[ht]
      \begin{center}
        \includegraphics[width=0.90\linewidth]{figures/pic_run02156_ev631_cluster1_longprofile} \\
        \includegraphics[width=0.90\linewidth]{figures/pic_run02156_ev631_cluster1_latprofile}
        \caption{Supercluster profile in the longitudinal (top) or
          transverse (bottom) direction, for a long and straight
          cosmic ray track candidate. The longitudinal profiles shows
          energy deposition in sub-clusters, while the transverse
          direction shows the typical width of the diffusion in the
          gas. For the longitudinal profile, the line represent the
          average number of photons per slice. For the transverse
          profile, it represents a fit with a Gaussian
          PDF. \label{fig:profiles}}
      \end{center}
    \end{figure}

  \item \textit{projected path length:~} for curly and kinky tracks
    the values returned by the SVD of the supercluster are not an
    accurate estimates of its size. While the width is dominated by
    the diffusion, the length for patterns like the one shown in the
    example of Fig.~\ref{fig:super_clusters1} is ill-defined. In these
    cases, the path length, $l_p$, computed with the skeletonization
    process in Fig.~\ref{fig:skeleton} is used;

  \item \textit{Gaussian $\sigma$:~} in the transverse direction the
    true width of the track is expected to be much lower than the
    width induced by the diffusion in the gas. Thus, as shown in
    Fig.~\ref{fig:profiles} (bottom), the standard deviation,
    \tsigmag, can estimated by a fit with a Gaussian probability
    density function (PDF);

  \item \textit{slimness:~} the ratio of the width over length,
    $\xi=w/l$, represents the aspect ratio of the cluster. It is very
    useful to discriminate between cosmic rays-induced background
    (long and thin) from low energy nuclear or electron recoils (more
    elliptic or circular, as the \fe spots);
    
  \item \textit{integral:~} the total number of photons for all the
  pixels gathered in the supercluster, \isclu, as defined in
  Eq.~\ref{eq:integral};

  \item \textit{pixels over threshold:~} the number of pixels in the
  supercluster passing the zero-suppression threshold, $n_p$;

  \item \textit{density:~} the ratio $\delta$ of \isclu, divided by
  $n_p$, as defined in Eq.~\ref{eq:density};

  \item \textit{energy:~} the calibrated energy, expressed in
    \keV. The calibration includes both the per-slice correction as a
    function of the local $\delta$, and the absolute energy scale
    calibration, which corrects the non perfect containment of the
    cluster, done with \fe source.
\end{itemize}

The projected supercluster path length, $l_p$, and Gaussian transverse
size, \tsigmag, are shown in Fig.~\ref{fig:clsize}, for data taken in
different types of runs.  During the data-taking approximately 3000
frames were recorded in absence of any external source ({\it
no-source} sample). In these frames the interaction of
ultra-relativistic cosmic ray particles (mostly muons) are clearly
visible as very long cluster. Internal radioactivity of the \lemon
materials also contribute several smaller size cluster. About 1500
frames were gathered with the \ambe radioactive source, and about
$10^4$ calibration events with \fe source. In this figure, as well as
in the following ones showing other cluster properties, the
distributions obtained from without radioactive sources are normalized
to the \ambe data total CMOS exposure time. For the data with \fe,
since the activity of the source is such to produce about 15
clusters/event, the data are scaled by a factor one-tenth of the \ambe
exposure time for visibility. Considerations about the trigger
efficiency scale factor between data with and without a source are
detailed later. The distributions in this section are meant to show
the different shape of cluster properties.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \begin{center}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/length}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/tgausssigma}

  \caption{Supercluster sizes projected onto the 2D $x$--$y$
    plane. Left: longitudinal path length, $l_p$.  Right: transverse
    Gaussian spread, \tsigmag. Filled points represent data with \ambe
    source, dark gray (light blue) distribution represents data
    with \fe source (no source).  The normalization of data without
    source is to the same exposure time of the \ambe one. For the data
    with \fe source, a scaling by a factor one tenth is applied for
    visibility, since the much larger cluster occupancy for these
    events.  \label{fig:clsize}} \end{center}
\end{figure}

As described in Sec.~\ref{sec:layout}, each pixel images an area of
$125\times125$\unit{$\mu$m$^2$}. Thus the cluster sizes distributions
show an average Gaussian width of the \fe spots
$\tsigmag\approx500$\unit{$\mu$m} (dominated by the diffusion in the
gas), while it is larger, pproximately 625\unit{$\mu$m}, for data
with \ambe source.  The contribution of cosmic rays, present in all
the data, is clearly visible in the data without any radioactive
source, corresponding to clusters as long as the detector transverse
size (22\unit{cm}).

Other variables which characterize the clusters is the aspect ratio,
$\xi$, and the light density, $\delta$, shown in
Fig.~\ref{fig:clshape}. The former is a useful handle to reject tracks
from cosmic rays, which have typycally a slim pattern, with low values
of $\xi$, while the clusters from \fe are almost round, with values of
$\xi\approx1$. Data with \ambe source, which contains also a component
of nuclear recoils, shows a component of round spots, similar in size
to the ones of \fe, and a more elliptical component, with
$0.4<\xi<0.8$ values. Finally, the light density $\delta$ is the one
which is expected to better discriminate among different candidates:
cosmic rays induced background, electron recoils and nuclear recoil
candidates. This is the variable used for the final particle
identification.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \begin{center}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/slimness}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/density}

  \caption{Supercluster variables. Left: aspect ratio $\xi$; right:
    light density $\delta$. Filled points represent data with \ambe
    source, dark gray (light blue) distribution represents data
    with \fe source (no source).  The normalization of data without
    source is to the same exposure time of the \ambe one. For the data
    with \fe source, a scaling by a factor one tenth is applied for
    visibility, since the much larger cluster occupancy for these
    events.  \label{fig:clshape}}

\end{center}
\end{figure}

Finally, Fig.~\ref{fig:energy} shows the calibrated energy ($E$)
spectrum for the reconstructed superclusters and the average projected
\dedl. The energy spectrum shows the $E=6\keV$ for data
with \fe source, and a characteristic broad peak for cosmic rays
tracks at around 60\keV. The distribution of the observed
\dedl for the no-source sample and for the \ambe
samples. The broadening of the distribution is mainly due to the
specific energy loss fluctuation in the gas mixture of the cosmic ray
particles.  Its mean value corrected for the effect of the angular
distribution of the cosmic rays is xx keV/cm that is in good agreement
with the \garfield prediction of 2.3 keV/cm.

\begin{figure}[ht]
  \begin{center}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/energyExt}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/dedx}

  \caption{Supercluster calibrated energy spectrum (left) and their
    average \dedl.  Filled points represent data with \ambe source,
    dark gray (light blue) distribution represents data with \fe
    source (no source).  The normalization of data without source is
    to the same exposure time of the \ambe one. For the data with \fe
    source, a scaling by a factor one tenth is applied for visibility,
    since the much larger cluster occupancy for these
    events.  \label{fig:energy}}

\end{center}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Background normalization}
\label{sec:background}
The data with \ambe source, taken on the Earth surface, suffers from a
large contribution of interactions of cosmic rays. The cluster shape
variables provide a powerful handle to discriminate them from nuclear
recoils candidates, but the small residual background needs to be
statistically subtracted. The distributions shown earlier, where the
different types of data are normalized to the same exposure time,
demostrate that this is already a good estimate of the common
background. This simple normalization doesn't account for a possible
bias from the trigger, generated by the PMT signals, as described in
Sec.~\ref{sec:layout}. In run with the \ambe source the PMT can
trigger both on signals from neutron recoils or photons produced by
the $^{241}$Am, and on signals from cosmic rays, while in the sample
without source only the latter is possible.  This implies that, during
the same exposure time, the probability to trigger on cosmic rays is
lower in events with \ambe than in events without source. The trigger
efficiency scale factor, $\varepsilon_{SF}$, can be obtained as the ratio of the
number of clusters selected in pure control samples of cosmic rays ($CR$) in
both types of runs:
\begin{equation}
\label{eq:sfeff}
\varepsilon_{SF} = \frac{N^{AmBe}_{CR}}{N^{no-source}_{CR}}.
\end{equation}

The $CR$ control region is defined by selecting clusters with
$l>13$\unit{cm}, $\xi<0.1$, $\tsigmag<50$, within an energy range
dominated by the cosmic rays contribution, $50<E<80\keV$. The selected
clusters show small values of $\delta\approx5$, well compatible with
the small specific ionization of ultra-relativistic particles.  This
sample is limited in statistics, but is expected to be almost 100\%
pure. The scale factor obtained is $\varepsilon_{SF}=0.75\pm0.02$.

The typical light density and polar angle (with respect the horizontal
axis) for long and clusters of any energy, still dominated by cosmic
rays, are shown for the \ambe, for the \fe, and for the no-source
sample, after having applied the $\varepsilon_{SF}$ scale factor to
the latter, in Fig.~\ref{fig:cosmics}. Clusters with $\delta<6$ are
thus expected to be mostly coming from cosmic tracks, and they show
indeed a polar angle which is shifted at values towards $90^\circ$.


\begin{figure}[ht]
  \begin{center}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/density_cosmics}
  \includegraphics[width=0.45\linewidth]{figures/inclination_cosmics}

  \caption{Supercluster light density $\delta$ (left) and their polar
    angle, with respect the horizontal axis, for long clusters,
    dominated by cosmic rays tracks.  Filled points represent data
    with \ambe source, light blue distribution represents data without
    any source.  The normalization of data without source is to the same
    exposure time of the \ambe one, accounting for the trigger scale
    factor $\varepsilon_{SF}$, as defined in the text. For the data
    with \fe source, a scaling by a factor one tenth is applied for
    visibility, since the much larger cluster occupancy for these
    events.  \label{fig:cosmics}}

\end{center}
\end{figure}
